This video is a continuation of our discovery of functions in Python and how to write interactive math
functions in python. In particular, in this video the project that you are going to solve is a guessing
game.
It's really fun and I'm sure you will enjoy it.
So the idea is that you want to write a function and that's up here I didn't paste that in so you don't
see it but I called this function guess the number and the way that this function works is that Python
is going to pick a number.
So Python randomly generates an integer between 1 and 100 and then the user of this function --
you when you finish programming it -- has to pick the number that Python is thinking of.
Now I don't know if python actually thinks about things.
But anyway, so Python said guess a number between 1 and 100.
And it's an integer to be more specific.
I guessed forty two to start off with.
Now it turned out that the number that Python had guessed was higher than forty two.
So it gave me this result it said gets higher and then it said Guess again.
And then I put in 60.
But that was also too low.
So I had to guess higher.
And then I guess 80 it turned out that 80 was too high.
So then I guess 75 and so on.
Eventually I got to the right answer of 78.
And then I got this nice friendly message that said the right number was 78.
That was the number that Python picked randomly between 1 and 100.
And eventually I was able to correctly guess it.
All right.
So the goal of the project here is to basically create this function: guess the number.
Now I'm going to go to the next slide in a moment and give you a couple of hints.
If you don't want these hints, if you just want to get started right away, now is your opportunity to
pause the video and switch to Python.
Before I go to the next slide.
Ok so here are a few tips.
First of all to generate a random integer in Python you can use the function rando,m which is in the
numpy module, so you can type something like From numpy import random.
And then if you type random dot Rand int.
That will allow you to generate a random integer and you can specify two inputs here.
The first input will be the lower bound.
And the second input will be the upper bound.
Okay.
So that's one hint. Another hint is that the way you want to solve this is with a while function.
So not a for loop but a while loop.
And the third hint is that you might want to use this funny looking construction.
Exclamation point equals, which actually means not equals.
So this is the opposite of equals equals.
All right.
So these are a couple of hints.
I hope that's enough to get you started and allow you to successfully complete this project.
So now I will switch to Python and I'm going to solve it for you.
So I'm going to start with the hint that I gave you, so I'm going to type from numpy
Import random.
Now notice this is slightly different format from how I've been importing modules before.
So previously in the course I've showed you things like importing numpy as np.
But when you type the module importing syntax like this, then this function random is actually just going
to go directly into the default Python workspace, so now I can run this code and then I can type random
dot Rand.
Now notice I don't need the numpy here.
That would be the case if I wrote import numpy as np, and then I would need this np dot in the beginning.
Okay.
So actually normally I recommend setting things up this way, but I think it's also useful to know a little
bit more about how to use module syntax and importing from modules.
Okay.
So random rand int.
And now I didn't really tell you exactly how to use this function, so I'm going to press on the keyboard
shift and then tab while the cursor is inside the parentheses here.
Now notice that that opens up this little window I'm going to press this plus sign over here and that
gives me some more information about using this function.
So this says rand int and low comma and then high equals none, which means the default is no input, no upper
bound.
Okay.
So I want to say let's start just for you know making sure we understand how this function works.
I'm going to say one comma five and then press control enter and that returned a result of two and now
I'm going to press it again.
And now I got four two three.
OK.
So you can see these are randomly generated integers between 1 and actually 4.
I wrote five here but it's going to be one less than the upper number, because that's how indexing in
Python works.
All right.
So this is a big project, or... medium-sized project; we need to figure out how to organize our code writing
experience.
So what I'm going to do is before I really start writing code I'm actually just gonna write a bunch
of comments.
It's going to say function definition.
Now we can already think about what kinds of inputs we are going to need into the function. And in fact
we don't need any inputs, no inputs necessary.
That's because all of the necessary inputs and processes are going to happen inside the function.
Okay.
After we define the function, then we need to generate a random integer and then after that we need to
ask the user for a guess.
Okay.
So the user is going to input some number as a initial guess, and then we need to check whether the number
is a match, so whether the number that the user inputted here is the same as the number that was generated
here.
And then if it's not a match,
so let's see, if too low print a message and ask for another input -- I should say another guess.
And if too high then we also want it to print a message and ask for another guess.
Okay.
And then if the guess is correct,
congratulate.
Congrats.
the user.
All right.
So this is our outline.
Notice I haven't actually written any code yet.
All I'm doing here is thinking about the high level structure of what the code should look like.
All right.
So now we can get started.
So now I'm going to say def guess the number like this, with the colon at the end.
And now we need to generate a random integer, so I will  say... let's call this num to guess.
That seems like a good variable name and that's going to equal to.
I'm just going to move this text down here random dot round.
And now we want a random integer between 1 and 100, which actually means that the second input has to
be one hundred and one, one higher than the upper bound.
All right.
So far so good.
Now we ask the user for a guess. Let's say user guess I'm going to call this variable user guess and
then is going to be input guests a number between 1 and 100.
Okay.
And remember from previous videos that the output of this function, this input function, is going to be
a string.
But we actually want this to be a number.
So I'm going to convert this to an integer.
So now that you are starting to get some experience with programming functions, you might already see,
you might already know, that this code is going to crash on this line.
If the user inputs a number that is not an integer so a number with a decimal point.
So for our purposes here.
That's fine.
I'm not going to be too concerned about testing that, but you should know that if you are starting to
use more production-level functions and code that you want other people to interact with, it would be
a good idea to break this line up into multiple lines of code to test whether the input is actually
an integer.
And then you can make a decision about what you would want to do with a non integer guess.
Maybe you could ask for another guess or maybe you could just round it to the nearest integer. Anyway,
for now, for this video,
we are going to be assuming that only integer numbers will be entered.
So now we need to check whether the number is a match.
So here is where we use both the while loop and the not equals operator.
So I have to say while the user guess is not equal to numb to guess, which is python's number.
And now here we're going to enter into this while loop.
So the idea of a while loop is that you stay inside this loop basically forever until, you know, the computer
powers down, or the Sun blows up, or whatever is in this conditional ends up being true.
So as long as the users guess is not equal to the num to guess variable, so that's the number that Python
randomly generated,
then we're going to stay inside this while loop. And as soon as this statement becomes true[false], which actually
means that the user guess equals the number that Python generated, then we can break out of this while
loop.
Okay so let's see. What do we want to do inside this while loop?
So we want to compare the user's guess to the to Python's guess.
That's gonna be this one.
So let's say if the user guess is smaller than num to guess, then we went to print a message. So we can
say guess higher.
So the number was too small.
So we need to guess higher.
So we need to give a little bit of informative feedback here.
Here I'm going to say l If user guess is greater than num to guess.
Then we went to print guess lower.
Okay.
Now that
also takes care of this one.
Let's see... I'm going to delete this comment and then I will make this comment a little bit more informative.
It's good to have informative comments. Print informative message and ask for another guess.
Okay, so far we haven't actually gotten another guess.
We've just told the user whether they guessed too high or too low.
Ah well here they guess too low.
So the feedback is that they need to get higher.
All right.
So after printing out these messages, we need to get another guess. I'm going to copy this line and paste
it here, except here this is going to say Guess again.
Okay so let's think about what happens here.
The user gives a first guess over here, and if the guess is not correct then we either get informative
feedback saying we need to guess higher, or we get we need to guess lower and then we get the opportunity
to guess again.
Now if the user guess is still not the same thing as the number that Python guessed, then we are still
inside this while loop and we go through this whole bit all over again.
We go through this over and over and over again, and eventually the user guess is the same thing as this
variable num to guess.
So this statement actually becomes false and we break out of the while loop, and that's when we can congratulate
our user and say print.
Yes you guessed correctly.
So you can see this is actually not such a long difficult involved function to create.
And the key to solving this function correctly and efficiently was starting with comments. So first I
wrote comments and then when I was sure that the comments all made sense,
then I started to write code.
All right so now I'm going to run this.
We don't get any errors, so that's good.
And now I'm going to write guess the number and then we get the statement guess a number between one
and a hundred.
I'm gonna guess 42 again because that's a really great number.
It's a good thing to guess again.
Okay so guess lower.
Let's try for 20.
It wasn't as low as 20.
So we need to get higher.
How about 30.
Higher 35, lower than 35.
This is getting pretty exciting we are getting close!
All right! I got it!  :D
Thirty two.
The number is 32.
Okay maybe I got a little bit too excited about guessing the number there, but it feels good to write
a good piece of code.
All right.
So in these past several videos, you have learned how to make interactive math functions using functions
in Python.
Some of these functions take input, some functions give outputs, other functions don't require inputs
or outputs. Creating your own functions in Python is a really important skill in programming and I hope
you now feel like you have a pretty strong footing to continue improving your coding skills.